# Project: Data Warehouse

**Introduction**
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, you are tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

**Project Description**
In this project, you'll apply what you've learned on data warehouses and AWS to build an ETL pipeline for a database hosted on Redshift. To complete the project, you will need to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift and execute SQL statements that create the analytics tables from these staging tables.

## Getting Started

** Please run all code from jupter notebook `Project.ipynb` this will ensure that all AWS services used is closed properly **

## Prerequisites
- Create a new IAM user in your AWS account
- Give it `AdministratorAccess`, From `Attach existing policies directly` Tab
- Take note of the access key and secret 
- Edit the file `dwh.cfg` in the same folder as this notebook and fill
    
```Python
[AWS]
KEY= YOUR_AWS_KEY
SECRET= YOUR_AWS_SECRET
```

## Database Schema Design
The project creates a redshift database in the cluster using python with pre-defined empty tables then it opied over to the tables from s3 bucket. They are columnar in nature which helps with parallelizing the execution of one query on multiple CPUs. 

## ETL Pipeline
The project creates a star schema relational database.


## Project Datasets

Project Datasets
We will be working with two datasets that reside in S3. Here are the S3 links for each:

Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data
Log data json path: s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json

#### Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json

#### Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json


## Schema for Song Play Analysis

Using the song and event datasets, you'll need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

#### Fact Table

1.  **songplays**  - records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page  `NextSong`
    -   _songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent_

#### Dimension Tables

2.  **users**  - users in the app
    -   _user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level_
3.  **songs**  - songs in music database
    -   _song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration_
4.  **artists**  - artists in music database
    -   _artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude_
5.  **time**  - timestamps of records in  **songplays**  broken down into specific units
    -   _start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday_

